James Booth Lockwood (October 9, 1852 – April 9, 1884) was a United States Army officer and arctic explorer.


== Biography ==

Lockwood was born in Annapolis, Maryland, to Henry Hayes Lockwood and his wife Anna. He attended St. John's College. He was commissioned second lieutenant in the 23rd Infantry of the United States Army in October 1873.   He was promoted to first lieutenant in March 1883.  In 1881, Lockwood signed up for the Lady Franklin Bay expedition under Adolphus W. Greely, and was accepted as second-in-command.
During this three-year expedition, Lockwood led a sledging party, with David Legge Brainard, to Mary Murray Island, off northern Greenland, at a latitude of 83° 24', thus breaking the British record of the time for the most northerly point reached. In 1883, he crossed Grant Land, reaching the western shore of Ellesmere Island. 
He died at Cape Sabine in April 1884, along with several other members of the party, before rescue arrived on June 22, and was buried at the United States Naval Academy Cemetery.
Lockwood Island in northern Greenland was named in his honor.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to James Booth Lockwood at Wikimedia Commons
Works about James B. Lockwood at Open Library
Works by or about James B. Lockwood in libraries (WorldCat catalog) Vasili Vasilyevich Pronchishchev (Russian: Василий Васильевич Прончищев) (1702–9 September [O.S. 29 August] 1736) was a Russian explorer.In 1718, Vasili Pronchishchev graduated from Moscow School of Mathematics and Navigation and was promoted to naval cadet. In 1733, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and appointed head of one of the units of the Second Kamchatka Expedition, the purpose of which was to map the shores of the Arctic Ocean from the mouth of the Lena to the mouth of the Yenisey.
In 1735, Vasili Pronchishchev went down the Lena River (from Yakutsk) on his sloop Yakutsk, doubled its delta, and stopped for wintering at the mouth of the Olenek River. Many members of the crew fell ill and died, mainly owing to scurvy. Despite the difficulties, in 1736, he reached the eastern shore of the Taymyr Peninsula and went north along its coastline. Finally Pronchishchev and his wife Maria (also referred to as Tatyana Feodorovna) succumbed to scurvy and died on the way back.
Despite the death toll, the expedition was successful regarding the fulfillment of its goals. During his journey, Vasili Pronchishchev discovered a number of islands off the northeastern coast of the Taymyr Peninsula (Faddey Islands, Komsomolskoy Pravdy Islands, Saint Peter Islands). His expedition was the first to accurately map the Lena River from Yakutsk to its estuary and the Laptev seacoast from the Lena's mouth to the Gulf of Faddey. Pronchishchev's wife Maria Pronchishcheva (died 12(23) September 1736), who took part in his expedition, is considered the first female polar explorer. After their deaths, both of them were interred at the mouth of the Olenek River.
Further information is now available from the Hakluit Society via a summary written by William Barr in July 2018, "The Arctic Detachments of the Russian Great Northern Expedition (1733-43) and their largely forgotten and even Clandestine Predecessors". On page 12 of the summary is shown information and maps on the Lena-Khatanga detachment led by Pronchishchev.
A part of the eastern coastline of the Taymyr Peninsula  and a ridge between the mouths of the Olenek and Anabar Rivers bear Vasili Pronchishchev's name.  Icebreaker Vasili Pronchishchev, built in 1961 in Leningrad, was also named after this pioneering Arctic explorer.
Maria Pronchishcheva Bay in the Laptev Sea is named after his wife Maria.


== References ==

Historical data
Excavations at the burial site of the couple: [1] Antoni Bolesław Dobrowolski (6 June 1872 – 27 April 1954) was a  Polish geophysicist, meteorologist and explorer.


== Early life ==
Dobrowolski was born into an indigent family in Dworszowice Kościelne, and supported himself from the age of 12 by teaching younger students while a high school student in Warsaw. His involvement in seeking Polish independence led to a conviction to three years imprisonment in the Caucasus, but after two years he escaped and started studying in Switzerland and Belgium.


== Belgian Antarctic Expedition ==
While still a student in biology, physics and chemistry at the University of Liège he took part in the Belgian Antarctic Expedition (1897-1899) as assistant meteorologist. Henryk Arctowski, who was in charge of physical observations, was initially unsuccessfully in convincing expedition commander Adrien de Gerlache to take him on, but when the Belgica had to return to Ostend for repairs and the ship's doctor and a sailor quit, he was contracted as a sailor.
However, his substantial scientific contributions prompted de Gerlache to formally promote him in March 1898. Arctowski and Dobrowolski were the first to conduct year-round meteorological and hydrographical observations off Antarctica. In addition he studied ice crystallography and light phenomena in ice clouds. These data enabled him to write a monumental treatise on the crystallography of ice and snow.
After his return from the Antarctic he obtained a scholarship in Belgium to study his results and collaborated with Georges Lecointe at the Royal Observatory of Belgium.


== Later career ==
In 1907 Nicholas II of Russia declared amnesty for political refugees, enabling Dobrowolski to return to Warsaw. Until 1914, he worked as a schoolteacher. During the First World War he lived in Sweden, where he studied ice and snow formation. After the war he returned to Poland, where he finished his treatise on the crystallography of ice and snow, Natural History of Ice (Historia naturalna lodu). The concept of the cryosphere can be traced back to this monogram. He also published works on pedagogy and research ethics, while teaching pedagogy at the Polish Free University in Warsaw, and was deeply involved in the organization of education in newly independent Poland. In 1924 he was appointed deputy director, and later director, of the Polish Meteorological Institute in Warsaw.He founded several observatories and the Society of Geophysicists in Warsaw, and actively promoted polar research in Poland. During the second Polar Year (1932-1933) he provided practical help and advice to the Polish expedition that overwintered on Bear Island. He headed the organizing committee of the 1934 Polish expedition to Spitsbergen, and was involved with the 1938 Polish Expedition to Oscar II Land. After the Second World War he pushed for further Polish scientific involvement in Polar research. He died in 1954, without seeing the implementation of his ideas in the Polish participation in the International Geophysical Year. His fellow Polish explorers and scientists regarded him as a "father figure", and he naturally became a center of Polar knowledge. He died in Warsaw, aged 81.


== Tributes ==
An occasionally active Polish research station in the Bunger Hills, Dobrowolski Island, Dobrowolski Peak and Dobrowolski Glacier (both on King George Island) are named after him.


== See also ==
List of Poles


== References ==


== External links ==
Antoni Boleslaw Dobrowolski Writings at Dartmouth College Library 